state-and-event-handling (#38)
Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-3: state-and-event-handling/updating-state.md

This code will update a piece of state named `pieceOfState`, and its new value will be `'New value of pieceOfState.'`.

### Updating State Re-Renders the Component

Recall that pieces of state are responsible for managing how one piece of the component looks. For example, they can control if an element shows or hides or the classes that an element has.

**Every time a piece of state is updated, the component re-renders**.

### !callout-warning

## Working With State and Re-Rendering

Re-rendering a component is hard work! Firstly, setting state is _asynchronous_. Secondly, to repeat, _every time that state updates, the component re-renders_. These two facts will aid us when debugging state.

### !end-callout

## Updating State As Part of Event Handling

The best time to update state is in response to _handling user events_.

We can use our update functions inside an event handler.

### Example: Increasing Like Count

Let's imagine a `Post` component. It's responsible for displaying the number of likes that a post has.

Each post starts with zero likes. When we click the "like" button, the number of likes increases.

Let's consider the code we need to write for this:

> 1. The `Post` component should have a piece of state, `likesCount`.`likesCount` is ideally a piece of state, and not a `prop`, because state can be modified within a component.
> 1. We should also get a function to update this piece of state, `setLikesCount`.

Reviewer: say what likesCount should be (changeable data) and how that implies it should be a piece of state
spacing
still gonna push for reference to function
```suggestion
1. The `Post` component should have a piece of state, `likesCount`. `likesCount` is data that changes within the component, so we should represent it with a piece of state rather than a `prop`.
1. We should get a reference to the update function for this piece of state, and store it in a variable with a good name like `setLikesCount`.
```

Author: Keep pushing for reference to function!! I'll try to do a sweep for that in the latest PR

1. The "like" button should listen for click events, using the attribute `onClick`.
1. When the "like" button is clicked, we should call an event handler function. We can name this function `increaseLikes`.
1. When our component increases likes in `increaseLikes`, we should update our state using `setLikesCount`.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js

> import { useState } from "react";
> 
> const Post = () => {
>     const [likesCount, setLikesCount] = useState(0);
>     const increaseLikes = () => {
>         console.log('We\'re inside increaseLikes!');
>         setLikesCount(likesCount + 1);
>     }
> 
>     return (<section>
>         <p>The number of likes is {likesCount}.</p>
>         <button onClick={increaseLikes}>Like</button>
>     </section>)
> }

Reviewer: quotes, spacing and ;
```suggestion
import { useState } from 'react';

const Post = () => {
    const [likesCount, setLikesCount] = useState(0);
    const increaseLikes = () => {
        console.log('We\'re inside increaseLikes!');
        setLikesCount(likesCount + 1);
    };

    return (
      <section>
        <p>The number of likes is {likesCount}.</p>
        <button onClick={increaseLikes}>Like</button>
      </section>
    );
};
```

export default Post;
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

When we look at our web app, our count of likes starts at zero:

![An app that reads "The number of likes is 0." and a "like" button. The browser Dev Tools are open.](../assets/state-and-event-handling_updating-state_zero-likes.png)  

> _Fig. An app that reads "The number of likes is 0."_

Reviewer: update caption
```suggestion
_Fig. A Post just waiting to be liked!_
```

> When we click it once, we see that `increaseLikes` has been invoked... and the number of likes has increased! Our state has been updated!

Reviewer: Since we haven't gotten to the image, it sounds better to me to have this be present.
explicit mention of state update leading to a re-render
point out that the initial value is still being passed on subsequent renders, but that it is ignored
```suggestion
When we click the "like" button once, we see that `increaseLikes` gets invoked... and the number of likes increases! Our state has been updated, and our component has been re-rendered.

Even though our `useState` is still passing `0` for the initial value, the value that `likesCount` gets on each following render is the updated value!
```

![An app that reads "The number of likes is 1." and a "like" button. The browser Dev Tools are open. The console reads "We're inside increaseLikes!"](../assets/state-and-event-handling_updating-state_one-like.png)  

> _Fig. An app that reads "The number of likes is 1." and a "like" button. The browser Dev Tools are open. The console reads "We're inside increaseLikes!"_

Reviewer: update caption
```suggestion
_Fig. The console message shows that the button called our event handler, and ultimately increased the like count._
```

> Clicking on the "like" button five times continues to update state!

Reviewer: we already clicked once, so four more to get 5
```suggestion
Clicking on the "like" button four more times continues to update the component state!
```

> ![An app that reads "The number of likes is 5." and a "like" button. The browser Dev Tools are open. The console reads "We're inside increaseLikes!"](../assets/state-and-event-handling_updating-state_five-likes.png)  
> _Fig. An app that reads "The number of likes is 5."_

Reviewer: minor alt text updates (include the number of times the message was displayed)
update caption
```suggestion
![An app that reads "The number of likes is 5." and a "like" button. The browser Dev Tools are open. The console reads "We're inside increaseLikes!" with a count of 5 beside.](../assets/state-and-event-handling_updating-state_five-likes.png)  
_Fig. The like count is up to five, and the console message was also printed 5 times, denoted by the 5 beside it._
```

### Seeing Multiple `Post`s Manage Their Own State

Each instance of a component manages its own state, separate from other components.

Imagine this `App` component, which renders three `Post` components.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js

> function App() {
>   return (<main>
>     <Post></Post>
>     <Post></Post>
>     <Post></Post>
>   </main>)
> }

Reviewer: spacing and ;
```suggestion
function App() {
  return (
    <main>
      <Post></Post>
      <Post></Post>
      <Post></Post>
    </main>
  );
}
```

```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

Our web app renders three posts, which all manage their own `likesCount` state.

![A web app that has three sentences and three like buttons. The first sentence says "The number of likes is 1." The second sentence says "The number of likes is 8." The third sentence says "The number of likes is 4."](../assets/state-and-event-handling_updating-state_three-posts.png)  

> _Fig. The web app with three different posts with three different counts of likes. The first post has 1 like, the second post has 8 likes, and the third post has 3 likes._

Reviewer: update caption
```suggestion
_Fig. Three different Posts with three different like counts that update independently_
```

Here, we've clicked "like" on the first post once, the second post eight times, and the third post four times.

## Sofia's Journey: Changing Student Styles On Presence

Sofia is a teacher creating an attendance web app in React. She has the following components:

| <div style="min-width:200px;">Component</div> | Description                                                                                                                               |
| ---------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `App`                                          | Holds the data of all students. Renders an instance of `ClassInfo` and an instance of `StudentList`, and passes the student data to them. |

Reviewer: more specific about who's passing what to whom
```suggestion
| `App`                                          | Holds the data of all students. Renders an instance of `ClassInfo` and an instance of `StudentList`, passing the needed student data to each component. |
```

| `ClassInfo`                                    | Presents information about the class.                                                                                                     |
| `StudentList`                                  | Renders a list of `Student`s, based on the student data.                                                                                  |
| `Student`                                      | Presents information about a single student: their `name` and `email`.                                                                    |

<br/>

<details>

> <summary>Consider this initial implementation of the <code>Student</code> component.</summary>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<summary>Recall this initial implementation of the <code>Student</code> component.</summary>
```

```js

> import PropTypes from "prop-types";
> 
> const Student = (props) => {
>   return (
>     <li>
>       <ul>
>         <li>Nickname: {props.name}</li>
>         <li>Email: {props.email}</li>
>       </ul>
>     </li>
>   );
> };

Reviewer: quotes and relocate li
```suggestion
import PropTypes from 'prop-types';

const Student = (props) => {
  return (
    <ul>
      <li>Nickname: {props.name}</li>
      <li>Email: {props.email}</li>
    </ul>
  );
};
```

Student.propTypes = {
  name: PropTypes.string.isRequired,
  email: PropTypes.string.isRequired,
};

export default Student;
```

</details>

Sofia wants to add a feature of toggling the presence of a student.

When a student is present, their name is green. When a student is absent, their name is red.

For each student, there is a button to toggle if the student is present or not.

> 

Reviewer: explain why the ClassInfo isn't in the output
```suggestion

> Throughout the remainder of this lesson, the `ClassInfo` component output will be omitted for clarity.

```

![A web app that lists three students. One student's name is in red. Two students' names are in green.](../assets/state-and-event-handling_updating-state_some-green-1.png)  
_Fig. Sofia's ideal end result. Ada has a red name because they are absent. Soo-ah and Chrissy have green names because they are present._

She'll need to update her app in the following ways:

1. Create two CSS classes: one that sets the name to green, and another to set the name to red

> 1. Create a piece of state in `Student` to hold if the student is present
> 1. Create a button in `Student` to toggle if the student is present

Reviewer: if → whether
```suggestion
1. Create a piece of state in `Student` to hold whether the student is present
1. Create a button in `Student` to toggle whether the student is present
```

1. Create an event handler that updates state whenever the button is clicked
1. Use the CSS class in `Student`. One CSS class should be applied if the student is present, and the other CSS class should be applied if they're absent.

### CSS Classes

In `src/components/Student.css`, Sofia adds these two classes:

```css
.green {
  background-color: greenyellow;
}

.red {
  background-color: lightcoral;
}
```

### Create `isPresent` State in `Student`

In `src/components/Student.js`, Sofia adds these two lines to create `isPresent` state:

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js
import { useState } from 'react';
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

This line is in the `Student` component function, before the return statement:

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js
    const [isPresent, setIsPresent] = useState(false);
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

### Create the Toggle Presence Button in `Student`

> Sofia updates the returned JSX in `Student`. She adds this `<button>`, with an appropriate label.

Reviewer: more specificity about where the button goes
```suggestion
Sofia updates the returned JSX in `Student`. She adds this `<button>` just after the `</ul>` tag, with an appropriate label.
```

<!-- Simon note: I added the indentation to clue to the student that it is likely indented? -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js
    <button>Toggle if {props.name} is present</button>
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

> 

Reviewer: add callout about the need for a wrapping tag
markdown in following comment
no suggestion because code

Reviewer: ### !callout-danger

## Adjacent JSX elements must be wrapped in an enclosing tag

React tries to update the running web app as Sofia saves her changes, but after saving the `<button>`, React displays the error, "Adjacent JSX elements must be wrapped in an enclosing tag." Sofia realizes that she has violated the rule that React components must return a single parent JSX element!

<br/>

She knows that if she really didn't want to modify her JSX structure further, she could make use of React [Fragments](https://reactjs.org/docs/fragments.html) to group her elements, but instead, she decides to fix this situation by introducing an additional tag.

### !end-callout

To deal with the enclosing tag requirement, Sofia decides to wrap the `Student` JSX in a `<div>` tag, updating the `return` as follows:

```js
    return (
        <div>
            <ul>
                <li>Nickname: {props.name}</li>
                <li>Email: {props.email}</li>
            </ul>
            <button>Toggle if {props.name} is present</button>
        </div>
    );
```

Author: Thank you sooooo much for writing this 😭

Author: I'll add this commit after merging your branch into this :) I hope this comment doesn't disappear!!

### Create the Event Handler

Sofia now creates the event handler, which updates the `isPresent` state. This function is in the `Student` component function, before the return statement.

<!-- Simon note: I added the indentation to clue to the student that it is likely indented? -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js
    const togglePresence = () => {
        setIsPresent(!isPresent);

>     }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    };
```

Author: Ooof, come ON simon! How did i miss this!!

```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

#### Attach the Event Handler to the Button

She modifies her `<button>` JSX to include this click event listener:

<!-- Simon note: I added the indentation to clue to the student that it is likely indented? -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js
    <button onClick={togglePresence}>Toggle if {props.name} is present</button>
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

### Modify the JSX to Use Conditional CSS Classes

> Now, Sofia wants to use conditional CSS classes.
> 
> In her `Student` component, she creates a variable which holds the value of the appropriate CSS class. This value is based on:

Reviewer: she wants to pick a css class, not specifically use "conditional classes"
this section sounds like the setup before she does it a few passages later, so future sounds better here.
```suggestion
Now, Sofia needs to conditionally select which CSS class to apply to the student's name.

In her `Student` component, she will create a variable to hold the value of the appropriate CSS class. This value will use:
```

- The value of `isPresent`
- The names of the CSS classes she created earlier

First, she ensures that her CSS file is imported:

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js
import './Student.css';
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

Then, she creates a variable that holds the name of the (CSS) classes. She uses a ternary to express this. If `isPresent` is `true`, the variable should be `'green'`. If `isPresent` is `false`, it should be `'red'`.

This variable is in the `Student` component function, before the return statement.

<!-- Simon note: I added the indentation to clue to the student that it is likely indented? -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js
    const nameColor = isPresent ? 'green' : 'red';
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

> Finally, she should ensure that this variable is used as a class name in her JSX.

Reviewer: present like preceding sentence
```suggestion
Finally, she ensures that this variable is used as a class name in her JSX.
```

<!-- Simon note: I added the indentation to clue to the student that it is likely indented? -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js
    <li className={nameColor}>Nickname: {props.name}</li>
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

### Sofia's Result

Here is Sofia's final `Student` component:

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js
import { useState } from 'react';
import PropTypes from 'prop-types';
import './Student.css';

const Student = (props) => {
    const [isPresent, setIsPresent] = useState(false);

    const togglePresence = () => {
        setIsPresent(!isPresent);

>     }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    };
```

    const nameColor = isPresent ? 'green' : 'red';

>     return (
>         <li>
>             <ul>
>                 <li className={nameColor}>Nickname: {props.name}</li>
>                 <li>Email: {props.email}</li>
>             </ul>
>             <button onClick={togglePresence}>Toggle if {props.name} is present</button>
>         </li>
>     )
> }

Reviewer: li → div and ;
```suggestion
    return (
        <div>
            <ul>
                <li className={nameColor}>Nickname: {props.name}</li>
                <li>Email: {props.email}</li>
            </ul>
            <button onClick={togglePresence}>Toggle if {props.name} is present</button>
        </div>
    );
};
```

Student.propTypes = {
    name: PropTypes.string.isRequired,
    email: PropTypes.string.isRequired
};

export default Student;
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

When Sofia loads her web app, which has the student data of three students, she sees that the initial value of `isPresent` is `false` for all of them.

![A web app that lists three students. All three students have their names in a red background, to indicate that they are not present.](../assets/state-and-event-handling_updating-state_all-red.png)  

> _Fig. The web app that lists three students. All three students have their names in a red background, to indicate that they are not present._

Reviewer: update caption
```suggestion
_Fig. No one is here yet_
```

She can click on the buttons for each component, and toggle their presence!

> ![A web app that lists three students. One student's name is in red. Two students' names are in green.](../assets/state-and-event-handling_updating-state_some-green-1.png)  
> _Fig. Ada has a red name because they are absent. Soo-ah and Chrissy have green names because they are present._

Reviewer: updates alt text and caption
```suggestion
![A web app that lists three students. Ada's name is in red. Soo-ah's and Chrissy's names are in green.](../assets/state-and-event-handling_updating-state_some-green-1.png)  
_Fig. Sofia clicks the buttons for Soo-ah and Chrissy_
```

> ![A web app that lists three students. One student's name is in red. Two students' names are in green.](../assets/state-and-event-handling_updating-state_some-green-2.png)  
> _Fig. Soo-ah has a red name because they are absent. Ada and Chrissy have green names because they are present._

Reviewer: updates alt text and caption
```suggestion
![A web app that lists three students. Soo-ah's name is in red. Ada's and Chrissy's names are in green.](../assets/state-and-event-handling_updating-state_some-green-2.png)  
_Fig. Clicking around some more, Sofia can mark Soo-ah as absent instead_
```

We can even open up our browser Dev Tools and witness the CSS classes change.

![The attendance web app with browser Dev Tools opened. The dev tools show that the element containing Soo-ah's name has the class "red."](../assets/state-and-event-handling_updating-state_some-green-dev-tools.png)  

> _Fig. The attendance web app with browser Dev Tools opened. The dev tools show that the element containing Soo-ah's name has the class "red."_

Reviewer: update caption
```suggestion
_Fig. Inspector view confirming that the element has the class "red"_
```

* Create a button in `Student` to toggle if the student is present
* Create an event handler that updates state whenever the button is clicked
* Use the CSS class in `Student`. The styles of a student's name should change, based on the state of the student's attendance

##### !end-options
### !end-challenge
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

<!-- Question 3 -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
### !challenge
* type: paragraph
* id: a714dce3
* title: Updating State
##### !question

Imagine a weather app.

There is a component that holds the value of the temperature in degrees, named `Temperature`.

In this component, there is a button to increase the temperature.

If the temperature is above 32 degrees F, the temperature should be **red**. If it's below or equal to 32 degrees F, the temperature should be **blue**.

Create a list of steps or pseudocode to implement this feature in `Temperature`.

##### !end-question
##### !placeholder

1. In the Temperature component, import...

##### !end-placeholder
### !end-challenge
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

<!-- Question 4 -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
### !challenge
* type: paragraph
* id: 1e5956e1
* title: Updating State
##### !question

> Create a generic list of steps to follow to add event-handling to _any_ component.

Reviewer: I got tripped up by "to follow to add"
```suggestion
Create a generic list of steps we can follow to add event-handling to _any_ component.
```
